The Project Gutenberg eBook of Recipes Used in the Cooking Schools, U. S. Army
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Recipes Used in the Cooking Schools, U. S. Army


Creator: United States. Army

Release date: May 4, 2021 [eBook #65250]

Language: English

Credits: MFR, Quentin Campbell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECIPES USED IN THE COOKING SCHOOLS, U. S. ARMY ***

                          Transcriber’s Note

The punctuation, hyphenation and unusual spelling of the original text
has been retained in this transcription. Correction of a typographical
error is as noted at the end.

Bold text is denoted by =equal signs= while small capitals in the
original text have been transcribed as ALL CAPITALS.

           ————————————————— Start of Book —————————————————




                                RECIPES

                              USED IN THE

                           COOKING SCHOOLS,

                              U. S. ARMY.


                            [Illustration]


                              WASHINGTON:
                      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE,
                                 1906.




                               CONTENTS.

                                ——————

                                                            Page.
    Title page                                                  1

                               RECIPES.
    SOUPS:
        Bean                                                    7
        Beef                                                    7
        Bouillon                                                7
        Pea                                                     7
        Potato                                                  8
        Rice                                                    8
        Spanish                                                 8
        Tomato, cream                                           8
        Tomato and corn                                         9
        Vegetable                                               9
    FISH AND OYSTERS:
        Codfish balls                                           9
        Salmon, boiled                                          9
        Salmon, creamed, on toast with egg sauce               10
        Salmon croquettes                                      10
        Oyster potpie                                          10
    SAUCES:
        Army                                                   11
        Army chocolate                                         11
        Cream                                                  11
        Egg                                                    11
        Spanish                                                11
        Tomato, for baked beans                                12
        Tomato, cream                                          12
        White                                                  12
    GRAVIES:
        Browned flour for                                      12
        Burnt sugar                                            12
        Cream                                                  12
    MEATS:
        Bacon and Pork—
            Bacon                                              13
            Bacon and liver                                    13
            Boston baked pork and beans                        13
        Beef—
            A la mode                                          13
            Boiled                                             14
            Boiled (corned) and cabbage                        14
            Croquettes                                         14
            Fritters                                           14
            Hash                                               15
            Hearts stuffed with bread dressing                 15
            Loaf                                               15
            Roast                                              15
            Steak, broiled                                     16
            Steak and onions                                   16
            Stewed                                             16
            Stew with dumplings                                17
        Chili con carne                                        17
        Crepinettes de veau                                    17
        Hamburger steak                                        16
        Mutton potpie                                          18
        Pot roast                                              18
    VEGETABLES:
        Baked beans                                            18
        Potatoes—
            Baked                                              18
            Baked, sweet, and apples                           19
            Balls                                              19
            Boiled                                             19
            Creamed                                            19
            Escalloped                                         21
            Fried                                              20
            German fried                                       20
            Lyonnaise                                          20
            Mashed                                             20
            Salad                                              20
            Saratoga                                           21
        Mush—
            Fried                                              21
            Indian corn meal                                   22
        Macaroni and cheese                                    22
    BREAD:
        Corn                                               22, 23
        Dressing                                               23
        French toast or fried                                  23
        Rye and graham                                         24
        Biscuits—
            English tea                                        24
            For twenty men                                     24
        Cakes—
            Buckwheat                                          24
            New England corn johnny                            25
            White-bread batter                                 25
        Muffins—
            Corn meal                                          25
            Graham gems                                        25
            Hot                                                26
    PUDDINGS, ETC.
        Apple                                                  26
        Apple dumplings                                        26
        Apple fritters                                         26
        Apple roll                                             26
        Apple stewed or apple sauce                            27
        Cornstarch                                             27
        Cracker                                                27
        Custard                                                28
        Custard bread                                          28
        English plum                                           28
        Fruit                                                  28
        Peach                                                  29
        Peach fritters                                         29
        Plum                                                   29
        Rice                                                   30
        Tapioca                                                30
    SAUCE:
        For apple fritters                                     30
        Brandy                                                 31
    DESSERTS:
        Cakes—
            Ginger                                             31
            Griddle                                            31
            Rice                                               32
        Ginger snaps                                           31
        Ice cream, cheap                                       32
        Lemon sherbet                                          32
        Orange sherbet                                         33
        Pie—
            Apple                                              33
            Pumpkin                                            33
        Prunes, stewed                                         34
    COFFEE:
        Party                                                  34
        Soldier’s                                              34




                      RECIPES USED IN THE COOKING
                          SCHOOL, U. S. ARMY.

                              ——————————

                                SOUPS.


### Bean soup (for 20 men).

Take 3 pounds beans and soak overnight in about 2 quarts of water. When
ready to make the soup add 2 quarts of boiling water and let boil for
about 2 hours, or till done. Add ¼ pound fine chopped onions and season
with salt and pepper to taste. Strain thru a collander. Put on the
stove and let come to a boil, then it is ready to serve.


### Beef stock.

Select beef bones and pieces of meat not used for any special purpose,
place in a boiler of cold water, and stand on back of stove and let
simmer. At end of about 6 hours strain into another vessel and it is
then ready for use.


### Bouillon soup (for 20 men).

Take 5 quarts beef stock, put on stove and let come to boil; add 1
onion, chopped fine, salt and pepper to taste. Add 2 tablespoonfuls
burnt sugar and strain thru fine strainer and serve “en crotons.”


### Pea soup (for 20 men).

Take 2 quarts peas, 3 quarts of water, salt and pepper, 1 can
evaporated cream, onions. Boil peas until soft, and strain thru a
collander. Slice and fry 2 or 3 onions in brown grease until brown.
Add cream, onions, and beef stock to the pea soup. Salt and pepper to
taste.


### Rice soup.

Take 4 pounds rice, 5 gallons beef stock, salt and pepper to taste.
Boil for 4 hours.


### Potato soup (for 20 men).

Take 10 or 12 potatoes, boil, mash, and mix them with a quart of
boiling milk or cream. Have a well-seasoned soup stock ready, made
with beef and veal bones and the usual vegetables. Ham bones can also
be used. Slightly thicken it while boiling, which will prevent the
potatoes from settling to the bottom. Mix 4 quarts of this stock with
the potato cream, strain all, and season well; add a sprinkling of
parsley and keep hot without boiling. Cost of 7 quarts, 40 cents.


### Spanish soup (for 20 men).

Take 4 quarts beef stock, 1 can tomatoes, 2 medium-sized onions chopped
fine, 2 or 3 chili peppers chopped fine, a little Cayenne pepper; put
on stove and let boil or simmer for about 1 hour. Season with salt to
taste and keep hot till served. No thickening in any soups. Strain this
soup or not as desired.


### Cream tomato soup (for 20 men).

Take 2 quarts beef stock, 2 cans tomatoes, 2 ounces onions chopped
fine, 2 ounces sugar, salt and pepper to taste. Let boil about 1 hour.
When cooked strain thru a collander. Just before serving add ½ can of
cream: then serve.


### Vegetable soup.

One-half boilerful cabbage (2 heads) chopped; potatoes, 3 pounds, raw,
chopped; 3 pounds chopped onions; 2 cans tomatoes; and 1 pound rice.
Put in with beef stock and cook not less than 4 hours. Thickening
(flour), salt and pepper to taste.


### Corn and tomato soup (for 15 men).

Take 1 quart green corn, cut off the cob; 1 quart tomatoes, cut small;
1 pint mixt vegetables, cut small; in 5 quarts seasoned beef stock.
Boil up and season to taste. Cost of 7 quarts, 40 cents.




                           FISH AND OYSTERS.


### Codfish balls (for 20 men).

Take 3 pounds codfish, put in cold water and soak overnight before
being used. Put in boiler the codfish with about 3 quarts cold water
and let boil ½ hour. Drain the water from the codfish and pick out
bones, or meat from bones. Run it thru hash machine. Take 5 pounds
cold boiled potatoes, run thru hash machine; add pepper, parsley, and
seasoning. Work the ingredients all well together and roll into 2-ounce
balls. Make a batter of 2 eggs and a little milk. Dip the balls into
the batter, then into cracker dust, and fry in hot boiling lard till
nice brown color. Serve hot.


### Boiled Salmon.

Put 5 cans salmon, open, in pan of hot water, and let remain on stove
till heated thru. Make a cream sauce of 3 quarts beef stock, 1 can
evaporated cream, salt and pepper, and parsley to taste. Put on stove
and let come to a boil. Mix ½ pound white flour in 1 pint water and
thicken the mixture. Turn the salmon out on a large platter and pour
over the white sauce and serve hot. Can either be served on toast or
not.


### Creamed salmon on toast with egg sauce (for 20 men).

Make cream sauce, adding eggs. Take 5 cans salmon, remove from cans and
put in vessel with about 1 pint beef stock and let come to a boil. Make
an egg sauce: 2 quarts beef stock, 1 quart milk (1 can evaporated cream
makes ½ gallon milk). Thicken with ¼ pound flour, season with salt and
pepper, set on stove, let come to a boil and it is then ready for use.
Egg sauce: Add 4 hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine; toast some stale bread
2 or 3 inches square, lay neatly on a dish. Put the salmon on top of
toast, pour sauce over, then serve. Garnish if desired.


### Salmon croquettes (for 20 men).

Take 4 cans salmon, 4 pounds cold boiled potatoes, 2 eggs, season with
salt and pepper. Grind thru hash machine. Roll into cakes about 2
inches in diameter, like biscuits. Make an egg batter of 2 eggs and a
little milk. Dip each salmon ball into the batter and then into cracker
dust. Fry in deep hot lard, same as fish balls or doughnuts. Serve hot.


### Oyster potpie (for 20 men).

Make crust as follows: Take 3 pounds flour, 1 pound lard, 2 ounces
baking powder, 2 ounces salt, and water enough to make a stiff dough.
This does for any kind of meat pie. Take 3 cans oysters, fresh or cove
oysters, 1 quart milk, ¼ pound butter, ¼ bunch parsley. Put on stove
and let come to a boil. Thicken with ¼ pound flour, mixt in ½ pint cold
water. Should be baked about ¾ hour.




                                SAUCES.


### Army sauce.

Take 2 quarts beef stock, thicken with ¼ pound mixt flour, salt and
pepper to taste. Add 2 tablespoonfuls burnt sugar. Sugar should first
be dissolved in water, as it is better. This is used over fish, steaks,
and chops.


### Army chocolate sauce.

Take ½ dish pan water, 2 pounds sugar, 3 ounces chocolate, and ½ pound
cornstarch.


### Cream sauce.

Made the same as apple-fritter sauce.


### Egg sauce.

Put on to boil 2 quarts water, ½ can cream, 2 ounces lard, salt and
pepper. Thicken with ¼ pound flour. When done chop 4 hard-boiled eggs
fine. Then serve.


### Spanish sauce (for 20 men).

Take saucepan and put in 1 pint beef stock, 2 cans tomatoes, 4 chili
peppers chopped fine, 2 ounces onions chopped fine, 1 tablespoonful
salt, ¼ ounce black pepper, 2 or 3 dashes red pepper, 2 tablespoonfuls
browned sugar, 1 ounce lard or butter. Set on stove and let simmer
about 2 hours or till done.


### Tomato sauce for baked beans.

Take 5 cans tomatoes, mash up with hands, add 2 pounds onions, chopped,
½ gallon vinegar, 1 pound sugar (dissolved in vinegar), salt and pepper
to taste, 1 teaspoonful each Cayenne pepper, cinnamon, and cloves.


### Tomato cream sauce.

Made exactly like Spanish sauce with 1 can cream added.


### White sauce (for 20 men).

Take 2 quarts beef stock, 2 ounces butter, ½ can cream, ¼ pound flour
with cold water to thicken. Set all on stove until boils, then add the
flour till thickened. Salt and pepper to taste.




                               GRAVIES.


### Brown flour for gravy.

Roast flour the same as roasting coffee.


### Cream gravy.

Take ⅔ pan beef stock, 1 can cream, salt and pepper, and thicken with
flour, a little butter if on hand.


### Burnt sugar.

Made by frying ½ pound sugar in a pan. Let remain on stove and boil for
about 15 minutes. When the color of the sugar is a dark brown pour in 1
quart hot water and let simmer about 15 minutes till done.




                                MEATS.


                            BACON AND PORK.

### Bacon.

Bacon should be soaked in cold water about 2 or 3 hours, cut thin, and
fried crisp.


### Liver and Bacon.

Cut liver in thin slices the day before. Wash liver and let soak in
cold water, drain liver and let dry out in sack or towel. Salt and
pepper liver and put in flour. Fry bacon, then fry your liver in bacon
grease. One pound of bacon to 2 pounds of liver.


### Boston baked pork and beans (for 20 men).

Take 5 pounds beans, put into soak overnight and boil for 2 hours next
morning. Then draw water and put into baking pan. Season with salt (2
ounces), 1 quart molasses. Slice 4 pounds bacon and put in oven and let
bake 2 hours. When done they should be a chocolate-brown color.


                                 BEEF.

### Beef a la mode (for 20 men).

Take 8 pounds raw beef, cut in slices ½ inch thick by 4 inches square.
Take a dishpan, set on stove, and cover meat with 4 quarts beef stock
and let it simmer till well done. Add 1 can tomatoes, 2 onions chopped
fine, and let cook for ½ hour. Season with salt and pepper. Take 1
pound browned flour and mix with 1 quart cold water, pour over the beef
and let cook till thickened. Add ½ gill vinegar and serve hot.


### Boiled beef (for 20 men).

Take a bake pan and set on stove, put in 3 quarts cold water, 8 pounds
beef, cut in four pieces, and let boil for about 2 hours or until done.
Then pour white sauce over beef and serve.


### Boiled beef (corned) and cabbage (for 20 men).

Take 8 pounds corned beef soaked overnight, remove the water, add about
4 gallons fresh cold water to draw the salt out. Let boil about 1 hour,
then add 8 pounds cabbage, cut in quarters and thoroly washt in cold
water, and let boil about 2 hours longer, and will then be ready to
serve.


### Beef croquettes.

Take 3 pounds cold beef, cooked, pass thru hash machine; ¼ pound onions
chopped fine; season with salt, pepper, and mace. Make a white sauce:
1 pint beef stock, 2 ounces butter, thickened with ¼ pound white flour
in ½ pint water; pour the sauce over the meat. Set aside and let cool.
Roll into croquettes about 2 inches in diameter. Beat up 2 eggs, dip
the croquettes into the eggs, then into cracker dust. Fry in deep hot
lard same as doughnuts.


### Beef fritters (for 20 men).

Take 2 pounds flour, 2 ounces baking powder, 6 eggs, 1 quart cold
water, 3 pounds beef, cooked, ground thru hash machine. Stir this
mixture all together and beat to consistency of fritter dough. Serve
with brown gravy.


### Beef hash.

Take 3 pounds cooked meat ground in machine, 1 pound onions ground in
machine, and 5 pounds potatoes ground in machine. Season with salt,
pepper, and ground sage to taste, adding 3 quarts stock. Put in oven
and bake brown till done—about 2 hours.


### Beef hearts, stuffed with bread dressing (for 20 men).

Take 3 beef hearts, thoroly washt in cold water, and dry thoroly. Then
make a bread stuffing as follows: Two loaves stale bread soaked in
about 1 quart cold water for about 15 minutes, 2 ounces chopped onions,
salt and pepper and ground sage to taste, ½ pound lard; thoroly mix the
stuffing together and stuff the hearts with this mixture. Put neatly in
a bake pan with a little grease and about 2 quarts beef stock. Let bake
about 2 hours, basting frequently. Slice and serve.


### Beef loaf (for 20 men).

Take 6 pounds raw beef ground fine, 1 pound onions chopped fine,
1 pound cracker dust ground fine, 4 eggs, salt and pepper, 4
chili peppers, and 1 pint beef stock, all mixt thoroly and molded
into 3-pound loaves, and put in oven and baked for 2 hours. Baste
frequently. When baked, loaves are sliced and served either hot or cold.


### Roast beef.

Cut in pieces. Place in pan. Salt and pepper to taste. Cover beef with
a little flour to brown beef. Pour in a little water to keep moist and
furnish water for gravy. Roast from 2 to 3 hours, depending upon sizes
of pieces of beef. Baste well.


### Broiled beefsteak.

Grease meat and place on top of stove to cook. Turn frequently until
done, well done, or rare, as desired. Salt and pepper and add a little
butter on top. Cover steak and put away.


### Beefsteak and onions (for 20 men).

Take 8 pounds beef, cut in steaks ½ inch thick. Put a frying pan on
stove with a little grease and fry about 20 minutes, or till done.
After the steaks are dished up, put the onions in the hot grease and
let fry 15 minutes, or till done. Onions served on top of beefsteaks.


### Hamburger steak (for 20 men).

Take 5 pounds raw beef, ground or chopped, 2 pounds onions, season with
salt and pepper. Mix all together and roll out in round balls of 2 or 3
ounces, and either put in oven and bake, or fry like doughnuts in deep
hot pot. Serve.


### Stewed beef (for 20 men).

Take 8 pounds raw beef or cooked beef, cut in strips about 2 inches
long, put in bake pan, pour over 5 quarts of beef stock, 2 ounces
onions chopped, ½ bunch parsley, salt and pepper to taste, thicken with
½ pound flour mixt in about 1 pint water, 2 tablespoonfuls burnt sugar,
to color the mixture, and let simmer on the stove for about 2 hours, or
till done.


### Beef stew with dumplings.

Take 5 pounds raw beef, cut into pieces 1 inch square, 5 pounds
potatoes diced about 1 inch square, 1 can tomatoes, and season with
salt and pepper. Put all ingredients in a pan. Place in about 3
quarts beef stock, put on stove, and let cook for about 1½ hours.
Make dumplings batter of 2 pounds flour, 3 eggs, 1 pint milk, 2
tablespoonfuls baking powder, a little salt and pepper, mix all
together thoroly. Drop in the hot mixture about the size of a hickory
nut and let boil about 15 minutes, and then serve good and hot.


### Chili con carne (for 20 men).

Take 4 pounds cold boiled meat, cut into about ½-inch dices, put into
baking pan enough bacon grease to cover the bottom of pan, chop about
2 pounds onions fine, and put the onions and beef in the hot greased
frying pan. Let the meat and onions brown nice brown color; chop fine
about 3 ounces chili peppers, put into the mixture and let simmer for
about 1 hour. Take about 5 pounds cold boiled beans, grind them thru
hash machine and add to the boiled mixture; let simmer about ½ hour.
Season with salt, pepper, and ground cloves. Add about 3 tablespoonfuls
burnt sugar and let simmer 20 minutes longer and serve hot, either on
toast or without.


### Crepinettes de veau.

Take ⅔ cold cooked meat, ⅓ raw beef without fat. Chop into sausage
meat; season with powdered sage, salt, and plenty of black pepper. Make
into little cakes and fry brown on both sides shortly before wanted.
Serve with gravy. Sixteen pounds cooked meat and 8 pounds raw beef
enough for 80 men.


### Mutton potpie (for 20 men).

Take 6 pounds mutton chopped in small pieces, 5 pounds potatoes chopped
in small pieces, 1 can tomatoes, 2 or 3 onions, and salt and pepper
to taste. Thicken with browned flour in 4 quarts water, 2 quarts beef
stock. All cooked together, slowly, in open pan for about 2 hours.
Crust same as for oyster potpie.


### Pot roast (for 20 men).

Take 8 pounds beef, put on stove in deep kettle and let brown for about
20 minutes. Then add 1 pint beef stock, salt and pepper to taste, and 2
onions chopped fine, and let simmer for about 2 hours until done. Turn
frequently.




                              VEGETABLES.


### Baked beans (for 100 men).

Take 25 pounds dry beans that have been soaked overnight and drain off
the water, cover them (little over) with fresh water and boil for 1
hour. This water will cook beans well. Divide them in 2 large bake pans
and season with salt and pepper and 7 pounds bacon, diced, ½ gallon
molasses, and bake at least 3 hours.


                               POTATOES.

### Baked potatoes.

Peel potatoes, wash thoroly, and place in shallow pan, season with salt
and pepper, add 1 sliced onion, sprinkle with a little flour. Put in a
little lard and beef stock. Bake in oven until done.


### Baked sweet potatoes and apples (for 80 men).

Take 30 pounds sweet potatoes and 12 pounds apples. Boil potatoes
about 2 minutes; then peel and slice carefully. Boil apples 1 minute;
then peel, core, and slice. Take greased bake pan and put in layer of
potatoes, then layer of apples, and so on. Put over all a little butter
or beef suet. If apples are too sour, add a little brown sugar. Bake
all in pan until done and serve warm.

A little expensive, but an excellent holiday dish.


### Potato balls (for 90 men).

Mash about 25 pounds boiled potatoes, season with salt and pepper, and
add a little milk. Make into small balls and put into a pan with very
little grease and brown on both sides.


### Boiled potatoes (for 20 men).

Take 10 pounds potatoes, thoroly washt, and put in a tin boiler and
cover with cold water and let boil ½ hour. After water boils, stick a
fork into 1 or 2 potatoes; if fork enters easily, they are done. Remove
from stove and pour the water off and serve good and hot, with or
without skins.


### Creamed potatoes.

Take 8 pounds raw potatoes, diced in 1-inch pieces, boil until done,
then pour water off; add 1 quart cold water, 1 can cream, and a little
parsley, salt and pepper, and thicken with ½ pound white flour mixt in
1 pint cold water, then serve.


### Fried potatoes.

Boil with peelings on, then slice and fry in lard; salt and pepper to
taste.


### German fried potatoes (for 20 men).

Take 8 pounds cold boiled potatoes, cut in round slices; add 2 pounds
onions chopped fine, salt and pepper to taste. Put in about ½ pound
lard and fry to nice brown color and serve hot.


### Lyonnaise potatoes.

Boil 30 pounds potatoes and cut up. Mix in 5 pounds raw onions and
little grease or lard. Bake in oven till done and browned.


### Mashed potatoes.

Take boiled potatoes, peel, mash well, adding cream, salt, and pepper.


### Potato salad (for 20 men).

Take 6 pounds cold boiled potatoes diced in ¼-inch pieces; 2 pounds
onions, raw, chopped fine; 1 bunch parsley chopped fine; season with
salt and pepper. Make a French dressing as follows: 1 pint vinegar,
2 tablespoonfuls sugar (brown or white), 2 or 3 dashes red pepper,
1 ounce dry mustard, ½ pound bacon chopped fine and fried. Pour the
vinegar mixture on the hot bacon and grease. Then set back on stove to
keep warm, and when ready to serve pour the vinegar, grease, etc., over
the potatoes, etc., then serve.


### Saratoga potatoes.

Dice potatoes raw, boil them until done, then drain and set away and
let cool. When cool fry in butter or lard until nice and brown. Add
parsley and chopped onions, 1 quart rich milk. Thicken with ¼ pound
flour. Season with salt and pepper and serve hot.


### Escalloped potatoes (for 100 men).

Take 35 pounds cold boiled potatoes, 8 pounds cheese, 8 cans condensed
milk, and 3 or 4 basting-spoonfuls of flour. Pare potatoes and slice
them. Grate cheese fine and mix cheese evenly with potatoes in bake
pan. Mix flour with milk and dilute milk with water until potatoes are
covered. Bake in slow oven.

It is sometimes thought to be an improvement to use less cheese and a
much larger quantity of finely ground beef suet.


### Fried mush (for 20 men).

Take 2 quarts beef stock, 2 quarts water, 1 ounce salt, and set on
stove and let boil for 4 or 5 minutes. Add 2 pounds corn meal. Put the
meal in a flour sieve and shake it gradually, stirring it thoroly all
the time, until it commences to thicken. Then set on back part of stove
and let simmer for about 1 hour or till done, when it drops freely from
the paddle. Pour into dish pan about 1 inch deep and set aside to cool.
When cool cut into 2-inch squares. Have about ½ pound lard in frying
pan. Fry to nice brown color. Serve hot with sirup.


### Indian corn meal mush.

Take 5 ounces corn meal, 2 quarts boiling water, 1 ounce salt. Mix corn
meal with cold water before putting it in, to prevent lumping. Stir in
slowly but be careful to keep the water boiling. Cover closely and let
boil 2½ hours. Stir frequently, to prevent scorching. Take off when
thick and let cool. Eight pounds corn meal enough for 80 men.


### Macaroni and cheese (for 80 men).

Break 14 pounds macaroni into convenient lengths and put into boiler of
boiling salted water. Use eight or ten times as much water as macaroni.
Boil from 20 to 30 minutes, until tender. Draw off water and pour
macaroni into a well-greased bake pan and bake in a moderate oven 1½
hours or until done, then cover with the following dressing: Two cans
tomatoes, 2 gallons beef stock, salt and pepper to taste, teaspoonful
thyme or a little bay leaves, and a little suet or butter. Put all the
dressing in a small boiler on fire and keep stirring until ingredients
are well incorporated. Pass dressing thru a sieve and pour over
macaroni. Grate over macaroni and sauce 6 or 8 pounds cheese.




                         BREAD, BISCUITS, ETC.


### Corn bread (for 20 men).

Take 2½ pounds white flour, 2½ pounds corn meal, ¼ pound butter, ¼
pound lard, 2 ounces baking powder, 1 quart milk, 8 eggs (yolks and
whites) beaten separately, 1 ounce salt, 2 ounces brown sugar. Mix all
thoroly together. Grease a bake pan well and pour in the mixture and
let bake about 45 minutes or till done. Test with a broom straw into
center of cake. If it comes out clean and dry it is done; if wet or
stuff sticks, not done.


### Corn bread (for 15 men).

Take 2 heaping cups yellow corn meal, 1 cup flour, 3 eggs, 2½ cups
sweet milk, 1 teaspoonful lard, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 3 teaspoonfuls
baking powder, 1 teaspoonful salt. Beat eggs thoroly, whites and yolks
separately. Sift baking powder with corn meal and flour. Melt lard, add
the last. Beat fast and thoroly. Bake ½ hour in greased pan.


### Bread dressing (for 20 men).

Take 5 pounds stale bread, put in cold water and let soak 15 minutes,
then drain off the water. Have chopped fine 2 pounds raw onions; 1
ounce sage, ground; salt and pepper to taste; ½ pound lard, butter,
suet, or bacon grease. Thoroly mix together and set in oven and let
bake about 1 hour. When ready to dish up pour 2 quarts beef stock over
the dressing and then serve.


### French toast or fried bread (for 20 men).

Take 2 loaves old bread left, and cut in slices. Beat 3 eggs well
together. Add ½ pint milk, and season with salt and pepper. Add 2
tablespoonfuls of sugar. Put on stove in frying pan with 2 ounces
butter. Dip the slices of bread in the egg batter and put in pan and
fry a nice brown. Serve hot.


### Rye and graham bread.

Take ½ wheat flour, ½ graham (or rye) flour, add 1 quart molasses for
100 pounds dough. Use sponge and dough system. Make sponge of wheat
flour.


### English tea biscuit (for 80 men).

Take 16 pounds flour, 2 pounds lard, 2 quarts cold water, 3 pounds
granulated sugar, 2 ounces caraway seed, 2 ounces ammonia, “for baker’s
use,” 2 ounces baking powder. Cut with regular or fancy cutters. Bake
in moderate oven. Ammonia “for baker’s use” can be had in any reliable
drug store, 4 ounces for 10 cents.


### Biscuits (for 20 men).

Take 4 pounds flour, 2 pounds lard, 2 ounces baking powder, 3 quarts
water (cold), 1 ounce salt. Mix together like dough, making medium
stiff dough. Grease pan before putting in biscuits. Roll dough ½ inch
thick. Place in pan close together and bake for 15 minutes or till they
are twice their original size.

Before baking biscuits punch them with a fork to have them hold their
shape.


### Buckwheat cakes (for 20 men).

Take 4 pounds self-raising buckwheat flour and mix with cold water till
it will pour easily from spoon. Add 1 ounce salt. Have cake griddle
well greased and hot. Bake for about 5 minutes. When done on one side
turn over and send to table good and hot. Butter and sirup used to eat
with cakes.


### New England corn johnnycake (for 80 men).

Take 7 pounds corn meal, 7 pounds flour, 2 pounds granulated sugar, 1½
pounds lard, 4 ounces salt, 3 cans evaporated cream, 18 eggs, 12 ounces
baking powder. Rub in lard with hand and make a fine batter with cold
water. When well mixt pour into a well-greased pan. Bake at once in a
moderate oven.

NOTE.—Eggs may be reduced if baking powder is increased.


### White-bread batter cakes (for 80 men).

Take 8 pounds bread crumbs, 6 pounds flour, 8 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls
baking powder, 1½ ounces salt, cold water or milk to mix it. Remove all
dark crusts from the bread and soak in cold water until soft, press
out dry, mash smooth, add flour, water (or milk), eggs, and powder. It
always improves batter cakes to beat the eggs light before mixing them
in. No shortening or sirup needed for above. Cost 60 cents.


### Corn-meal muffins (for 90 men).

Take 4 pounds flour, 6 pounds corn meal, 3 pounds sugar, 1 dozen eggs,
4 tablespoonfuls baking powder, 2 ounces salt, and about 1 gallon
water. Mix up to thin dough and bake.


### Graham gems or muffins (for 20 men).

Take 2 pounds graham flour, 2 pounds wheat flour, ¼ pound melted
butter, 1 ounce salt, 2 ounces baking powder, 6 eggs, 1 quart milk, and
thoroly beat these ingredients. Have gem pans nicely greased. Pour in
the batter and fill gem pans about half full. Put in a very hot oven
and bake 20 minutes.


### Hot muffins (for 20 men).

Take 3 pounds flour, 1 ounce baking powder, ½ ounce salt, 3 ounces lard
or butter, 3 eggs, and enough water or milk to make a batter to drop
from spoon. Grease the gem pans or muffin mugs and fill mugs half full
of dough and bake.




                            PUDDINGS, ETC.


### Apple pudding (for 20 men).

Same as peach pudding, except use apples instead of peaches.


### Apple dumplings.

Take 5 pounds pie dough and roll out in strips about 6 by 4 inches,
rather thin. Put on each strip a spoonful of stewed apples, evaporated
(if green fresh apples use raw), and fold over the four corners and
roll in a round ball. Put in oven and bake about 45 minutes or till
done. Serve hot with a white sauce (sweet cream).


### Apple fritters (for 20 men).

Take 4 pounds flour, 6 ounces baking powder, 1 ounce salt, 6 eggs
broken in flour, 3 pints water, 1 can cream, 1 quart stewed apples. Mix
all together. Add flour until it is thick enough to drop from spoon.
Fry in hot lard like doughnuts.


### Apple roll (for 20 men).

Take 3 pounds flour, 1 pound lard, 1 ounce baking powder, 2 ounces
salt, mix with cold water, enough to make a thick dough, ½ pound dried
apples, soak and cook. Roll out dough similar to cinnamon roll, place
in greased bread pan. Break and beat an egg and paint rolls with this
to brown color. The egg is not necessary, but it makes rolls look well.
Place in oven and bake.


### Stewed apples or apple sauce (for 20 men).

Take 1 quart water, 2 pounds apples, 1½ pounds sugar, 1 lemon, squeezed
and peeling in, cinnamon and nutmeg to taste. Put all on stove and let
cook about 1 hour. Soaking of apples not necessary.


### Cornstarch pudding (for 20 men).

Take 1 pound cornstarch, 1 pound sugar (granulated), 3 quarts water,
1 quart cream or milk, 2 ounces salt, 1 tablespoonful cinnamon, 1
teaspoonful nutmeg, 1 dozen eggs, when practicable. Heat water to
a boiling point. Stir in cream, salt, sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg.
Dissolve the cornstarch in a small portion of the water and add the
eggs, well beaten. Boil briskly for a few minutes, stirring often to
avoid scorching. Set to cool in any kind of vessels, cups, vegetable
dishes, etc. Flavor with lemon, etc., if desired.

For baked cornstarch, pour this into a well-greased baking pan and bake
about 1 hour in a moderate oven. Make a cream sauce for this.


### Cracker pudding.

Take ½ dishpanful cracker meal (part bread soaked), water, 3 pounds
sugar. Mix up 1 can cream and peaches, stewed, on top. Bake in oven.
Sauce for same made as follows: 2 gallons water, 2 cans cream, 3 pounds
sugar, 2 ounces salt, and 1 pound cornstarch.


### Custard pudding (for 20 men).

Take 2 quarts milk, 1 quart water, ½ ounce salt, 6 eggs, 2 pounds
sugar, and thoroly beat all together. Have a baking pan well greased
and pour the mixture in and bake about ¾ hour or till it is done, then
serve. Can either flavor it or not. The best way to test this pudding
is to stick a straw in its center. If straw comes out clean it is done,
if particles stick to straw it is not done.


### Custard bread pudding (for 20 men).

Take 6 pounds stale or fresh bread, cut into small bits, 1 inch each
way. Then make a custard of 2 quarts milk, 8 eggs, 1 pound granulated
sugar, 1 nutmeg, a little salt (very little), ½ pound cornstarch. Put
milk on stove and let come to boil, and add the other ingredients, and
when it thickens it is done. Pour over the diced bread and serve hot.


### English plum pudding (for 80 men).

Take 3 pounds raisins, 3 pounds currants, 1½ pounds brown sugar, 1
pound orange peel, 3 pounds beef suet chopped fine and freed from
fiber, 3 pounds flour, peel of 6 lemons, 1½ ounces mixt spices, 3
pinches salt, 15 eggs, 1½ pints milk, 6 glasses brandy or best whisky.
Mix well, tie up with cloth in cans, boil 5 or 6 hours. Serve with
brandy sauce.


### Fruit puddings.

Are exactly as the fruit rolls, only the crust is put in a pan the same
as making a pie. Filling put in and cooked with a top crust.


### Peach pudding (for 20 men).

Take 3 pounds flour, 1 pound beef suet, 1 ounce salt, 1 quart milk, 2
ounces baking powder, 12 eggs, ½ pound sugar, and 1 pint cold water.
Beat these ingredients all well together to the consistency of a cake
batter dough (to drop easily from spoon). Have a well-greased pan, pour
the mixture, and let bake about 1 hour, or till done. Make a white
sauce as follows: 1 quart milk, 1 pint flour, 1½ pounds sugar, 2 pounds
stewed peaches, and set on stove. Let come to boil. Make thickening of
½ pound cornstarch and 1 pint water, and pour into the mixture till it
thickens, and when ready to serve pour over pudding and set in the oven
for about 15 minutes to bake nice and brown. When done serve.


### Peach fritters (for 20 men).

Take 4 pounds flour, 6 ounces baking powder, 1 ounce salt, 6 eggs
broken in flour, 3 pints water, 1 can cream, 1 quart stewed peaches,
mix all together. Add flour until it is thick enough to drop from
spoon. Fry in hot lard like doughnuts.


### Plum pudding (for 80 men).

Take 3 pounds beef suet chopped fine and freed from fiber, 2¼ pounds
stale bread crumbs thoroly grated, ¾ pound brown sugar, rind of 3
lemons, ¾ pound flour, 3 pounds raisins, 3 pounds currants, 1½ pounds
citron, 2 nutmegs, 15 eggs, 1½ pints milk. Put in deep pan, mix well,
tie up with cloth in cans, boil 5 to 6 hours. Serve with cream sauce.

Everything mentioned, except eggs, should be prepared the day before.

Cost about $2.75.


### Rice pudding (for 20 men).

Put on stove in a tin boiler 1 pound of rice in 3 quarts of water. Let
boil about 1 hour or till done, then remove from stove and add 6 eggs,
½ pound lard, 1 pound sugar, ½ pound currants, ½ pound raisins, and ½
can cream diluted in 1 pint water. Season with nutmeg, cinnamon, and
salt. Grease a bake pan and put mixture into the oven and let cook for
about 1 hour or till done.


### Tapioca pudding (for 20 men).

Take 2 pounds tapioca and boil in 1 pint cold water for 20 minutes.
Remove from fire and add 1 quart fresh milk (cow’s), ¾ pound sugar,
nutmeg, cinnamon, salt, and ¼ pound butter, and 8 eggs well beaten all
together. Mix all thoroly together. Put in a pudding dish and bake ¾
hour or till done, and serve with sweet cream sauce.


### Sauce for apple fritters (for 20 men).

Take 3 quarts boiling water, ¼ pound cornstarch, 1 can cream. Dissolve
starch in a little cold water to make creamy paste of it. Pour cream
in boiling water. Pour in cornstarch water when other water is boiling
well. Add 2 ounces butter, stir well. Remove from stove and add ¾ pound
granulated sugar, flour with a little nutmeg, cinnamon, lemon extract,
and pinch of salt. Serve hot with fritters. Fritters also hot.

NOTE.—In frying fritters do not let particles of fritters remain in
grease; they will burn the grease.


### Brandy sauce.

Take some good melted butter with new sweet milk, according to amount
required. Sweeten to taste and add about 4 glasses of brandy.




                               DESSERTS.


### Ginger cakes.

Take 2 pounds lard, 4 pounds sugar, and rub together. Then add 2 dozen
eggs (3 at a time). Then put 4 ounces ginger in about 1 teaspoonful
cinnamon, 1 pinch salt, 1 gallon molasses, 1½ ounces soda (3 heaping
teaspoonfuls baking powder), 6 pounds flour. Make a cake dough. Slack
so as to drop from a spoon. Put in 2 bake pans and bake 25 or 30
minutes till done.


### Griddle cakes (for 20 men).

Take 3 pounds flour, 2 ounces baking powder, 1 ounce salt, 10 eggs, 1
can cream, 1 quart water. Mix to consistency of thick batter. Fry on
cake griddle with griddle greased with bacon rind or grease.


### Ginger snaps (for 100 men).

Take 16 pounds flour, 1 gallon molasses, 4 pounds sugar, 6 ounces
powdered ginger, 5 ounces ammonia “for baker’s use,” 4 ounces baking
soda, 2½ ounces salt, 2½ ounces powdered cinnamon. Cut with regular
cutter. When about to put in the oven cover the tops of the cakes
with a wet cloth. This will cause them to spread and present a fine
appearance.


### Rice cakes No. 1 (for 80 men).

Take 10 pounds rice flour, 2½ pounds granulated sugar, 2 pounds butter
or lard, 8 ounces baking powder, 2 cans cream. Roll upon pastry board
and shape into cakes with a cake cutter. Bake in a slow oven.

One dozen eggs added to above will make a fine appearance.


### Cheap ice cream (for 40 men, 6 men to 1 quart ice cream).

Take 2 quarts milk, 5 pounds granulated sugar, 7 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 5 cans evaporated cream or 3 quarts fresh milk, 4 ounces
salt, 1 bottle flavoring extract. Boil the milk and cream, reserving
¼ cup of milk. Mix the sugar, cornstarch, and salt thoroly together,
add cold milk to the sugar mixture, and when well mixt add the boiling
milk, turn back the mixture into the double boiler, and cook 20
minutes. Stir constantly until smooth, and occasionally after that.
Strain all, add more sugar if needed, and when cold add the flavoring.
Freeze as usual. This may be increased by adding more sugar and cream.
If the milk is boiled when the cornstarch is added and cooked thoroly
there will be no taste of cornstarch. Cost, $1.03. Two dozen eggs may
be added to enrich cream.


### Lemon sherbet (for 40 men).

Take 25 lemons, 6 pounds granulated sugar, 8 quarts boiling water.
Shave off peel from 12 lemons in thin wafer-like parings, being careful
to take none of lighter-colored rind below the oil cells. Put parings
into a bowl and add boiling water and let it stand 10 minutes closely
covered. Cut the lemons in half, remove the seeds, squeeze out juice
and add it, with sugar, to the water. If needed, add more sugar. When
cold strain thru a fine strainer into can and freeze at once.


### Orange sherbet (for 40 men).

Take 8 tablespoonfuls gelatin, 40 oranges or 8 pints orange juice, 7
pints cold water, 6 pounds granulated sugar, 3 pints boiling water.
Soak the gelatin in 1 pint cold water. Cut the oranges in halves,
remove the seeds and squeeze all the juice into a large pitcher or
bowl. Add sugar to juice. Dissolve the gelatin in the boiling water and
add all to mixture in pitcher. Strain all into a can and freeze. If
oranges are very sour use more sugar.


### Apple pie (for 20 men).

Take 2½ pounds stewed apples, season with cinnamon, juice of ½ lemon,
and skin chopped fine. Crust: 4 pounds flour and 2 pounds lard.


### Pumpkin pie (for 20 men).

Take 2 pumpkins and peel and cut in about 2 or 3-inch squares, cover
with water and let boil about 1 hour. Drain off water and mash thoroly
and add ½ pound butter or bacon grease, ¼ pound sugar. Season with
nutmeg and cinnamon, and 1 ounce salt and 1 quart milk and 4 eggs
beaten together. Set on stove and let come to a boil, then it is ready.
Remove and let cool.


### Stewed prunes (for 20 men).

Take 2 pounds prunes, set on stove with water to cover and let cook 2
hours, or till soft and well done. Flavor with 2 pounds sugar and serve
cold.




                                COFFEE.


### Coffee for party.

Take 2 pounds coffee, 5½ gallons water, and whites of 2 eggs. Water
just boiling.


### Soldier coffee (for 20 men).

Put on stove 2½ gallons water and let come to a boil. Add ½ pound
ground coffee and let boil about 5 minutes. Remove from stove and put
in about 1 pint cold water to settle it. It is then ready for use.


                            [Illustration]


           —————————————————— End of Book ——————————————————


                    Transcriber’s Note (continued)

  Page 33 — “3 squares” changed to “3-inch squares” (cut in about 2 or
            3-inch squares)


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECIPES USED IN THE COOKING SCHOOLS, U. S. ARMY ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


